---
layout: page
title: "Spring 2025 GoByBike Week"
description: "GoByBike Week is back from May 31 to June 8, and the City of Nanaimo invites residents of all ages and cycling levels to join in the celebration of active transportation."
permalink: /events/2025/05/31/go-by-bike
event_datetime: "2025-05-31 2:00-6:00 pm"
event_location: "Maffeo Sutton Park, Downtown"
image: '/images/posts/2025-05-31-go-by-bike/go-by-bike-pride-parade-2024.png'
published: true
type: event
hidden: true
author: strong-towns-nanaimo
toc: true
---

Strong Towns Nanaimo is proud to be a part of this year's GoByBike Week! 

GoByBike Week is back from May 31 to June 8, and the City of Nanaimo invites residents of all ages and cycling levels to join in the celebration of active transportation. Whether you’re biking to work, school, errands or just for fun, every pedal stroke counts toward a healthier, more sustainable city. This year’s event kicks off with a launch party at Maffeo Sutton Park on Friday, May 31, featuring music, community booths, bike checkups and giveaways. 

Just like last year, you can find Celebration Stations across the city!

* **May 31:** Kick-off Event, Maffeo Sutton Park from 2 to 6 p.m.
* **June 1:** Westwood Lake Park from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
* **June 2:** North End, Metral Drive & Mostar Road from 7 to 9:30 a.m.
* **June 3:** Boxwood Road and Bowen Road from 9 to 11 a.m.
  * Across the street from Beban Park.
* **June 4:** E&N Trail, Giggleswick Place entrance from 7 to 9:30 a.m.
* **June 5:** Front Street and Museum Way from 4 to 6 p.m.
* **June 6:** Boundary Avenue NRGH parking lot from 6:45 to 9 a.m.
* **June 7:** Wrap-up Celebration, Maffeo Sutton Park from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
* **June 8:** Pride Parade, Selby Street at 9:30 a.m., parade starts at 11 a.m.
  * Meet in front of White Rabbit before riding as a group.

Throughout the week, Celebration Stations hosted by local sponsors will pop up across the city — so hop on your bike, stop in for some fun and fuel up with coffee, snacks and good vibes! Below is a map of all Celebration Station locations. 

<iframe src="https://www.google.com/maps/d/embed?mid=1AWK9fa7W0VP4XccQUXv7hfZ7_2aMLio&ehbc=2E312F" width="640" height="480"></iframe>

***
